<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" /><title>BAli-Phy Tutorial</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook.css" /><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets V1.78.1" /></head><body><div xml:lang="en" class="article" lang="en"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title"><a id="idp32903776"></a><span class="application">BAli-Phy</span> Tutorial</h1></div><div><div class="author"><h3 class="author"><span class="firstname">Benjamin</span> <span class="surname">Redelings</span></h3></div></div></div><hr /></div><div class="toc"><p><strong>Table of Contents</strong></p><dl class="toc"><dt><span class="section"><a href="#intro">1. Introduction</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#work_directory">2. Setting up the <code class="filename">~/alignment_files</code> directory</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#command_line_options">3. Command line options</a></span></dt><dd><dl><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp32328704">3.1. RNA</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33258624">3.2. Amino Acids</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33260672">3.3. Codons</a></span></dt></dl></dd><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33270496">4. Output</a></span></dt><dd><dl><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33275568">4.1. Inspecting output files</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33290016">4.2. Summarizing the output</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33304784">4.3. Generating an HTML Report</a></span></dt></dl></dd><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33309616">5. Starting and stopping the program</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33313296">6. Multi-gene analyses</a></span></dt><dd><dl><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33315248">6.1. A simple multi-gene analysis</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33329312">6.2. Using different models in different
partitions</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33333408">6.3. Using different indel models models</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33336240">6.4. Sharing model parameter between partitions</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33338416">6.5. Sharing substitution rates between partitions</a></span></dt></dl></dd><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33340752">7. Option files</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33343472">8. Dataset preparation</a></span></dt><dd><dl><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33344112">8.1. Splitting and Merging Alignments</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33349472">8.2. Shrinking the data set</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idp33353024">8.3. Cleaning the data set</a></span></dt></dl></dd></dl></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="intro"></a>1. Introduction</h2></div></div></div><p>
Before you start this tutorial, please <a class="link" href="http://www.bali-phy.org/download.php" target="_top">download</a> and install bali-phy, following the installation instructions in the <a class="link" href="http://www.bali-phy.org/README.html" target="_top">manual</a>.</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="work_directory"></a>2. Setting up the <code class="filename">~/alignment_files</code> directory</h2></div></div></div><p>Go to your home directory:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>cd ~</code></strong>
</pre><p>Make a directory called alignment_files inside it:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>mkdir alignment_files</code></strong>
</pre><p>Go into the <code class="filename">alignment_files</code> directory:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>cd alignment_files</code></strong>
</pre><p>Download the example alignment files:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>wget http://nucleus.biology.duke.edu/~bredelings/examples.tgz</code></strong>
</pre><p>Alternatively, you can use <span class="command"><strong>curl</strong></span>
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>curl -O http://nucleus.biology.duke.edu/~bredelings/examples.tgz</code></strong>
</pre><p>Extract the compressed archive:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>tar -zxf examples.tgz</code></strong>
</pre><p>Take a look inside the <code class="filename">examples</code> directory:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>ls examples</code></strong>
</pre><p>Take a look at an input file:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less examples/5S-rRNA/5d.fasta</code></strong>
</pre><p>Get some information about the alignment:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-info examples/5S-rRNA/5d.fasta</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="command_line_options"></a>3. Command line options</h2></div></div></div><p>
What version of bali-phy are you running?  When was it compiled?  Which compiler?  For what computer type?
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy -v</code></strong>
</pre><p>Look at the list of command line options:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy --help </code></strong>
</pre><p>Look at them with the ability to scroll back:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy --help | less</code></strong>
</pre><p>Some options have a short form which is a single letter:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy -h | less</code></strong>
</pre><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp32328704"></a>3.1. RNA</h3></div></div></div><p>
Analyze a data set, but don't begin MCMC.  (This is useful to know if the analysis works, what model will be used,
compute likelihoods, etc.)
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>cd ~/alignment_files/examples</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy --test 5S-rRNA/5d.fasta</code></strong>
</pre><p>Finally, run an analysis!  (This is just 50 iterations, so its not a real run.)
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/5d.fasta --iterations=50</code></strong>
</pre><p>If you specify <em class="parameter"><code>--imodel=none</code></em>, then the alignment won't be estimated, and indels will be ignored (just like <span class="application">MrBayes</span>).
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/5d.fasta --iterations=50 --imodel=none</code></strong>
</pre><p>You can specify the alphabet, substitution model, insertion/deletion model, etc.
Defaults are used if you don't specify.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/5d.fasta --iterations=50 --alphabet=DNA --smodel=TN --imodel=RS07 </code></strong>
</pre><p>You can change this to the GTR, if you want:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/5d.fasta --iterations=50 --alphabet=DNA --smodel=GTR --imodel=RS07 </code></strong>
</pre><p>You can add gamma[4]+INV rate heterogeneity:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/5d.fasta --iterations=50 --alphabet=DNA --smodel=GTR+gamma_inv[4] --imodel=RS07</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33258624"></a>3.2. Amino Acids</h3></div></div></div><p>
When the data set contains amino acids, the default is amino acids:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy EF-Tu/12d.fasta --iterations=50</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33260672"></a>3.3. Codons</h3></div></div></div><p>
What alphabet is used here?  What substitution model?
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy HIV/chain-2005/env-clustal-codons.fasta --test</code></strong>
</pre><p>What happens when trying to use the Nielsen and Yang (1998) M0 model (e.g. dN/dS)?
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy HIV/chain-2005/env-clustal-codons.fasta --test --smodel=M0 </code></strong>
</pre><p>The M0 model requires a codon alphabet:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy HIV/chain-2005/env-clustal-codons.fasta --test --smodel=M0 --alphabet=Codons </code></strong>
</pre><p>The M0 model takes a <span class="emphasis"><em>nucleotide</em></span> exchange model as a parameter.  This parameter is optional, and the default is HKY, which you could specify as <strong class="userinput"><code>M0[HKY]</code></strong>.  You can change this to be more flexible:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy HIV/chain-2005/env-clustal-codons.fasta --test --smodel=M0[GTR] --alphabet=Codons </code></strong>
</pre><p>The M7 model is a mixture of M0 codon models:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test --smodel=M7 --alphabet=Codons </code></strong>
</pre><p>The M7 model has parameters as well.  Here are the defaults:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test --smodel=M7[4,HKY,F61] --alphabet=Codons </code></strong>
</pre><p>It is possible to specify some of the parameters and leave others at their default value:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test --smodel=M7[,TN] --alphabet=Codons </code></strong>
</pre></div></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="idp33270496"></a>4. Output</h2></div></div></div><p>
See <a class="link" href="http://www.bali-phy.org/README.html#output" target="_top">Section 6: Output</a> of the manual for more information about this section.
</p><p>
Try running an analysis with a few more iterations.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/25-muscle.fasta &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>Run another copy of the same analysis:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/25-muscle.fasta &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>You can take a look at your running jobs:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>jobs</code></strong>
</pre><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33275568"></a>4.1. Inspecting output files</h3></div></div></div><p>
Look at the directories that were created to store the output files:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>ls</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>ls 25-muscle-1/</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>ls 25-muscle-2/</code></strong>
</pre><p>See how many iterations have been completed so far:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>wc -l 25-muscle-1/C1.p 25-muscle-2/C1.p</code></strong>
</pre><p>Wait a second, and repeat the command.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>wc -l 25-muscle-1/C1.p 25-muscle-2/C1.p</code></strong>
</pre><p>See if you can determine the following information from the beginning of the C1.out file:
</p><div class="orderedlist"><ol class="orderedlist" type="1"><li class="listitem">What command was run?</li><li class="listitem">When was it run?</li><li class="listitem">Which computer was it run on?</li><li class="listitem">Which directory was it run in?</li><li class="listitem">Which directory contains the output files?</li><li class="listitem">What was the process id (PID) of the running bali-phy program?</li><li class="listitem">What random seed was used?</li><li class="listitem">What was the input file?</li><li class="listitem">What alphabet was used to read in the sequence data?</li><li class="listitem">What substitution model was used to analyze the sequence data?</li><li class="listitem">What insertion/deletion model was used to analyze the sequence data?</li></ol></div><p>
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less 25-muscle-1/C1.out</code></strong>
</pre><p>Examine the file containing the sampled trees:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less 25-muscle-1/C1.trees</code></strong>
</pre><p>Examine the file containing the sampled alignments:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less 25-muscle-1/C1.P1.fastas</code></strong>
</pre><p>Examine the file containing the successive best alignment/tree pairs visited:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less 25-muscle-1/C1.MAP</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33290016"></a>4.2. Summarizing the output</h3></div></div></div><p>
Try summarizing the sampled numerical parameters (e.g. not trees and alignments):
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>statreport --help</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>statreport 25-muscle-1/C1.p 25-muscle-2/C1.p &gt; Report</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>statreport 25-muscle-1/C1.p 25-muscle-2/C1.p --mean &gt; Report</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>statreport 25-muscle-1/C1.p 25-muscle-2/C1.p --mean --median &gt; Report</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>statreport 25-muscle-1/C1.p 25-muscle-2/C1.p --mean --median --mode &gt; Report</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less Report</code></strong>
</pre><p>Now lets examine the summaries using a graphical program.  If you are using Windows or Mac, run Tracer, and press the <span class="guilabel">+</span> button to add these files.  What kind of ESS do you get?  If you are using Linux, do 
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>tracer 25-muscle-1/C1.p 25-muscle-2/C1.p &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>Now lets compute the consensus tree for these two runs:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>trees-consensus --help</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>trees-consensus 25-muscle-1/C1.trees 25-muscle-2/C1.trees &gt; c50.PP.tree</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>trees-consensus 25-muscle-1/C1.trees 25-muscle-2/C1.trees --report=consensus &gt; c50.PP.tree</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less consensus</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>figtree c50.PP.tree &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>Now lets see if there is evidence that the two runs have not converged yet.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>trees-bootstrap --help</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>trees-bootstrap 25-muscle-1/C1.trees 25-muscle-2/C1.trees &gt; partitions.bs</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less partitions.bs</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33304784"></a>4.3. Generating an HTML Report</h3></div></div></div><p>
Now lets use the analysis script to run all the summaries and make a report:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bp-analyze.pl 25-muscle-1/ 25-muscle-2/</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>firefox Results/index.html &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>This PERL script runs <span class="application">statreport</span> and <span class="application">trees-consensus</span> for you.  Take a look at what commands were run:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less Results/bp-analyze.log</code></strong>
</pre></div></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="idp33309616"></a>5. Starting and stopping the program</h2></div></div></div><p>We didn't specify the number of iterations to run in the section above, so the two analyses will run for
100,000 iterations, or until you stop them yourself.  See <a class="link" href="http://www.bali-phy.org/README.html#mixing_and_convergence" target="_top">Section
10: Convergence and Mixing: Is it done yet?</a> of the manual for
more information about when to stop an analysis.</p><p>In order to stop a running job, you need to kill it. One way of stopping
bali-phy analyses is this:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>killall bali-phy</code></strong>
</pre><p>However, beware: if you are running multiple analyses, this will
terminate all of them.
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="idp33313296"></a>6. Multi-gene analyses</h2></div></div></div><p>In this section we'll practice running analyses with multiple
partitions.  Dividing the data into multiple partitions is useful
because different partitions can have different models, or can have
different parameters for the same model. This is described in more
detail in section 4.3 of the <a class="link" href="http://www.bali-phy.org/README.html" target="_top">manual</a>.</p><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33315248"></a>6.1. A simple multi-gene analysis</h3></div></div></div><p>Let's look at a data set that is divided into three partitions:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-info ITS/ITS1-trimmed.fasta</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-info ITS/5.8S.fasta</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-info ITS/ITS2-trimmed.fasta</code></strong>
</pre><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h4 class="title"><a id="idp33318704"></a>6.1.1. Running the analysis</h4></div></div></div><p>
We can run an analysis of this partitioned data simply by supplying a
number of different alignment files as input to bali-phy.  Let's run an analysis
of these three alignment files:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy ITS/ITS1-trimmed.fasta ITS/5.8S.fasta ITS/ITS2-trimmed.fasta --smodel=TN --imodel=RS07 &amp;</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy ITS/ITS1-trimmed.fasta ITS/5.8S.fasta ITS/ITS2-trimmed.fasta --smodel=TN --imodel=RS07 &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>You could leave off the <strong class="userinput"><code>--smodel=TN --imodel=RS07</code></strong>
part of the command line:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy ITS/ITS1-trimmed.fasta ITS/5.8S.fasta ITS/ITS2-trimmed.fasta &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>This would give the same output, since TN and RS07 are the defaults.
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h4 class="title"><a id="idp33323840"></a>6.1.2. What did the analysis do?</h4></div></div></div><p>Now, lets look at sampled continuous parameters:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>statreport ITS1-trimmed-5.8S-ITS2-trimmed-1/C1.p | less</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>tracer ITS1-trimmed-5.8S-ITS2-trimmed-1/C1.p &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>You'll see that each partition has a TN (Tamura-Nei) substitution
model, as well as an RS07 indel model.  Each partition has its own
copy of the TN parameters and the RS07 parameters.</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h4 class="title"><a id="idp33327088"></a>6.1.3. Question</h4></div></div></div><p>The partitions share a common tree shape, including the same
relative branch lengths.  However, the size of the tree for each
partition is different.  We scale the whole shared tree by
mu1 in partition 1, mu2 in partition 2, etc.  The mu parameters give
the average branch length in that partition.  Thus, partitions with a
smaller mu value have slower evolution.</p><p>Do the different partitions of this data set have the same
evolutionary rates? Do the different partitions of this data set have
the same base frequencies?</p></div></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33329312"></a>6.2. Using different models in different
partitions</h3></div></div></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h4 class="title"><a id="idp33329952"></a>6.2.1. Using different substitution models</h4></div></div></div><p>
Now lets try to specify different models for different partitions.
Here we've used a command-line trick with curly braces {} to avoid
typing some things multiple times.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy ITS/{ITS1-trimmed,5.8S,ITS2-trimmed}.fasta --smodel=1:GTR --smodel=2:HKY --smodel=3:TN &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>
We've also specified different substitution models for each
partition.  Take a look at the <code class="filename">C1.p</code> file for
this analysis to see what parameters appear.
</p></div></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33333408"></a>6.3. Using different indel models models</h3></div></div></div><p>
We can also specify different indel models for each partition:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy ITS/{ITS1-trimmed,5.8S,ITS2-trimmed}.fasta --imodel=1:RS07 --imodel=2:none --imodel=3:RS07 --test</code></strong>
</pre><p>There are only two indel models: RS07, and none.  Specifying
<strong class="userinput"><code>--imodel=none</code></strong> removes the insertion-deletion
model and parameters for a partition.  It also disables alignment estimation for that partition.
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33336240"></a>6.4. Sharing model parameter between partitions</h3></div></div></div>
We can also specify that some partitions with the same model also share the
same parameters for the model:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy ITS/{ITS1-trimmed,5.8S,ITS2-trimmed}.fasta --smodel=1,3:GTR --imodel=1,3:RS07 --smodel=2:TN --imodel=2:none --test</code></strong>
</pre>This means that the information is pooled between the partitions to
estimate the shared parameters.
</div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33338416"></a>6.5. Sharing substitution rates between partitions</h3></div></div></div>
We can also specify that some partitions with the same model also share the
same parameters for the model:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy ITS/{ITS1-trimmed,5.8S,ITS2-trimmed}.fasta --smodel=1,3:GTR --imodel=1,3:RS07 --smodel=2:TN --imodel=2:none --same-scale=1,3:mu1 --test</code></strong>
</pre>This means that the branch lengths for partitions 1 and 3 are the
same, instead of being independently estimated.
</div></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="idp33340752"></a>7. Option files</h2></div></div></div>
You can collect command line options into a file for later use.  Make
a text file called <code class="filename">analysis1.script</code>:
<pre class="programlisting">
align = ITS/ITS1-trimmed.fasta
align = ITS/5.8S.fasta
align = ITS/ITS2-trimmed.fasta
smodel = 1,3:TN+DP[3]
smodel = 2:TN
imodel = 2:none
same-scale = 1,3:mu1
</pre>
You can run the analysis like this:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy -c analysis1.script &amp;</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="idp33343472"></a>8. Dataset preparation</h2></div></div></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33344112"></a>8.1. Splitting and Merging Alignments</h3></div></div></div><p>BAli-Phy generally wants you to split concatenated gene regions in order to analyze them.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>cd ~/alignment-files/examples/ITS/</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-cat -c1-223 ITS-region.fasta &gt; 1.fasta</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-cat -c224-379 ITS-region.fasta &gt; 2.fasta</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-cat -c378-551 ITS-region.fasta &gt; 3.fasta</code></strong>
</pre>
Later you might want to put them back together again:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-cat 1.fasta 2.fasta 3.fasta &gt; 123.fasta</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33349472"></a>8.2. Shrinking the data set</h3></div></div></div><p>
You might want to reduce the number of taxa while attempting to preserve phylogenetic diversity:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-thin --down-to=30 ITS-region.fasta &gt; ITS-region-thinned.fasta</code></strong>
</pre><p>
You can specify that certain sequences should not be removed:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-thin --down-to=30 --keep=Csaxicola420 ITS-region.fasta &gt; ITS-region-thinned.fasta</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idp33353024"></a>8.3. Cleaning the data set</h3></div></div></div>
Keep only columns with a minimum number of residues:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-thin --min-letters=5 ITS-region.fasta &gt; ITS-region-censored.fasta</code></strong>
</pre>Keep only sequences that are not too short:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-thin --longer-than=250 ITS-region.fasta &gt; ITS-region-long.fasta</code></strong>
</pre>Remove 10 sequences with the smallest number of conserved residues:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-thin --remove-crazy=10 ITS-region.fasta &gt; ITS-region-sane.fasta</code></strong>
</pre></div></div></div></body></html>