<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" /><title>BAli-Phy Tutorial (for version 3.1)</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook.css" /><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets V1.79.1" /></head><body><div xml:lang="en" class="article" lang="en"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title"><a id="idm1"></a><span class="application">BAli-Phy</span> Tutorial (for version 3.1)</h1></div><div><div class="author"><h3 class="author"><span class="firstname">Benjamin</span> <span class="surname">Redelings</span></h3></div></div></div><hr /></div><div class="toc"><p><strong>Table of Contents</strong></p><dl class="toc"><dt><span class="section"><a href="#intro">1. Introduction</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#work_directory">2. Setting up the <code class="filename">~/alignment_files</code> directory</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#command_line_options">3. Command line options</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm86">4. Analysis 1: variable alignment</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm143">5. Analysis 2: fixed alignment</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#substitution_models">6. Complex substitution models</a></span></dt><dd><dl><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm161">6.1. Defaults</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm179">6.2. Rate variation</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm189">6.3. Codon models</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm214">6.4. Fixing parameter values</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm229">6.5. Priors</a></span></dt></dl></dd><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm247">7. Generating an HTML Report</a></span></dt><dd><dl><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm252">7.1. Inspecting output files</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm282">7.2. Command-line summary of output files</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm307">7.3. Generating an HTML Report</a></span></dt></dl></dd><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm327">8. Starting and stopping the program</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#multigene">9. Specifying the model for each partition</a></span></dt><dd><dl><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm349">9.1. Using different substitution models</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm359">9.2. Disabling alignment estimation for some partitions</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm368">9.3. Sharing model parameters between partitions</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm377">9.4. Sharing substitution rates between partitions</a></span></dt></dl></dd><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm385">10. Option files</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm396">11. Dataset preparation</a></span></dt><dd><dl><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm399">11.1. Splitting and Merging Alignments</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm415">11.2. Shrinking the data set</a></span></dt><dt><span class="section"><a href="#idm426">11.3. Cleaning the data set</a></span></dt></dl></dd></dl></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="intro"></a>1. Introduction</h2></div></div></div><p>
Before you start this tutorial, please <a class="link" href="http://www.bali-phy.org/download.php" target="_top">download</a> and install bali-phy, following the installation instructions in the <a class="link" href="http://www.bali-phy.org/README.html" target="_top">manual</a>.</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="work_directory"></a>2. Setting up the <code class="filename">~/alignment_files</code> directory</h2></div></div></div><p>Go to your home directory:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>cd ~</code></strong>
</pre><p>Make a directory called alignment_files inside it:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>mkdir alignment_files</code></strong>
</pre><p>Go into the <code class="filename">alignment_files</code> directory:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>cd alignment_files</code></strong>
</pre><p>Download the example alignment files:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>wget http://www.bali-phy.org/examples.tgz</code></strong>
</pre><p>Alternatively, you can use <span class="command"><strong>curl</strong></span>
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>curl -O http://www.bali-phy.org/examples.tgz</code></strong>
</pre><p>Extract the compressed archive:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>tar -zxf examples.tgz</code></strong>
</pre><p>Take a look inside the <code class="filename">examples</code> directory:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>ls examples</code></strong>
</pre><p>Take a look at an input file (you can press 'q' to exit 'less'):
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less examples/5S-rRNA/5d.fasta</code></strong>
</pre><p>Get some information about the alignment:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-info examples/5S-rRNA/5d.fasta</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="command_line_options"></a>3. Command line options</h2></div></div></div><p>
What version of bali-phy are you running?  When was it compiled?  Which compiler?  For what computer type?
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy -v</code></strong>
</pre><p>Look at the list of command line options:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy --help | less</code></strong>
</pre><p>Some options have a short form which is a single letter:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy -h | less</code></strong>
</pre><p>
You can also show help for advanced options:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy --help=advanced | less</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy --help=expert | less</code></strong>
</pre><p>You can get help on the command line options:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy --help=iterations | less</code></strong>
</pre><p>You can also get help on models, distributions, and functions:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy --help=tn93 | less</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy --help=normal | less</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy --help=quantile</code></strong>
</pre><p>You can also get help on a topic using a less verbose syntax:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy help tn93</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy help normal</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy help quantile</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="idm86"></a>4. Analysis 1: variable alignment</h2></div></div></div><p>Let's do an analysis of intergenic transcribed spacer (ITS) genes from 20 specimens of lichenized fungi (Gaya et al, 2011 analyzes 68). This analysis will estimate the alignment, phylogeny, and evolutionary parameters using MCMC.</p><p>This data set is divided into three gene regions, or partitions.  It is assumed that all genes evolve on the same tree, but may have different rates and evolutionary parameters. Let's look at the sequences.  How long are they?
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>cd ~/alignment_files/examples/ITS</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-info ITS1.fasta</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-info 5.8S.fasta</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-info ITS2.fasta</code></strong>
</pre><p>By default, each gene gets a default substitution model based on whether it contains DNA/RNA or amino acids. By running bali-phy with the <strong class="userinput"><code>--test</code></strong> option, we can reveal what substitution models and priors will be used, without actually starting a run.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy ITS1.fasta 5.8S.fasta ITS2.fasta --test</code></strong>
</pre><p>Now start a run.  BAli-Phy will create an directory called <code class="filename">ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-1</code> to hold output files from this analysis.  
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy ITS1.fasta 5.8S.fasta ITS2.fasta &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>
Run another copy of the same analysis, which will create a new directory called <code class="filename">ITS-2</code> for its own output files.  This additional run will take advantage of a second processor, and will also help detect when the runs have performed enough iterations.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy ITS1.fasta 5.8S.fasta ITS2.fasta &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>
You can take a look at your running jobs.  There should be two bali-phy jobs running.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>jobs</code></strong>
</pre><p>After each iteration, one line containing values for numerical parameters (such as the nucleotide frequencies) is written to the files <code class="filename">ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-1/C1.log</code> and <code class="filename">ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-2/C1.log</code>.  So we can check the number of iterations completed by looking at the number of lines in these files:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>wc -l ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-*/C1.log</code></strong>
</pre><p>
The mean or the median of these values can be used as an estimate of the parameter.  The variance indicates the degree of uncertainty.  Let's look at the initial parameter estimates:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>statreport ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-1/C1.log ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-2/C1.log | less</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>statreport ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-1/C1.log ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-2/C1.log --mean | less</code></strong>
</pre><p>
The program Tracer graphically displays the posterior probability distribution for each parameter.  (If you are using Windows or Mac, first run Tracer, and then press the <span class="guilabel">+</span> button to add the files.)
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>tracer ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-1/C1.log ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-2/C1.log &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>
How does the evolutionary process for these genes differ in:
</p><div class="orderedlist"><ol class="orderedlist" type="1"><li class="listitem">substitution rate? (<strong class="userinput"><code>Scale[1]</code></strong>, <strong class="userinput"><code>Scale[2]</code></strong>, ...)</li><li class="listitem">insertion-deletion rate? (<strong class="userinput"><code>I1/rs07:log_rate</code></strong>, <strong class="userinput"><code>I2/rs07:log_rate</code></strong>, ...)</li><li class="listitem">nucleotide frequencies? (<strong class="userinput"><code>S1/tn93:pi[A]</code></strong>, <strong class="userinput"><code>S1/tn93:pi[C]</code></strong>, ... )</li><li class="listitem">number of indels? (<strong class="userinput"><code>#indels</code></strong>)</li></ol></div><p>
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="idm143"></a>5. Analysis 2: fixed alignment</h2></div></div></div><p>
Let's also start a <span class="emphasis"><em>fixed alignment</em></span> analysis.  This will estimate the tree and evolutionary parameters, but keep the alignment constant, similar to running MrBayes, BEAST, PhyloBayes, or RevBayes.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy ITS1.fasta 5.8S.fasta ITS2.fasta --name ITS-fixed -I none &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>The <strong class="userinput"><code>-I none</code></strong> is a short form of <strong class="userinput"><code>--imodel=none</code></strong>, where <em class="parameter"><code>imodel</code></em> means the insertion-deletion model.  When there's no model of insertions and deletions, then the alignment must be kept fixed.
</p><p>The <strong class="userinput"><code>--name</code></strong> option means that output files will be created in the directory <code class="filename">ITS-fixed-1</code>.
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="substitution_models"></a>6. Complex substitution models</h2></div></div></div><p>While those analyses are running, let's look at how to specify more complex substitution models in bali-phy.</p><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm161"></a>6.1. Defaults</h3></div></div></div><p>When you don't specify values for parameters like <em class="parameter"><code>imodel</code></em>, bali-phy uses sensible defaults.  For example, these two commands are equivalent:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>cd ~/alignment_files/examples/</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/25-muscle.fasta --test</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/25-muscle.fasta --test --alphabet=RNA --smodel=tn93 --imodel=rs07</code></strong>
</pre><p>You can change the substitution model from the Tamura-Nei model to the General Time-Reversible model:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/25-muscle.fasta --test -S gtr</code></strong>
</pre><p>Here the <strong class="userinput"><code>-S gtr</code></strong> is a short form of <strong class="userinput"><code>--smodel=gtr</code></strong>, where <em class="parameter"><code>smodel</code></em> means the substitution model.
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm179"></a>6.2. Rate variation</h3></div></div></div><p>
You can also allow different sites to evolve at 5 different rates using the gamma[4]+INV model of rate heterogeneity:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/25-muscle.fasta --test -S gtr+Rates.gamma[4]+inv</code></strong>
</pre><p>You can allow 5 different rates that are all independently estimated:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy 5S-rRNA/25-muscle.fasta --test -S gtr+Rates.free[n=5]</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm189"></a>6.3. Codon models</h3></div></div></div><p>
We can also conduct codon-based analyses using the Nielsen and Yang (1998) model of diversifying positive selection (dN/dS):
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test -S yn94+f1x4</code></strong>
</pre><p>The yn94 model takes a nucleotide exchange model as a parameter. This parameter is optional, and the default is hky85, which you could specify as yn94[,hky85_sym]. You can change this to be more flexible: 
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test -S yn94[,gtr_sym]+f1x4</code></strong>
</pre><p>You can make the codon frequencies to be generated from a single set of nucleotide frequencies:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test -S yn94[,gtr_sym]+mg94</code></strong>
</pre><p>The M7 model allows different sites to have different dN/dS values, where the probability of dN/dS values follows a beta distribution:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test -S m7</code></strong>
</pre><p>The M7 model has parameters as well. Here are the defaults:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test -S m7[4,hky85_sym,f61]</code></strong>
</pre><p>The M3 model allows different sites to have different dN/dS values, but directly estimates what these values are:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test -S m3[n=3]</code></strong>
</pre><p>The M8a_Test model allows testing for positive selection in some fraction of the sites:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test -S m8a_test[4,hky85_sym,f3x4]</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm214"></a>6.4. Fixing parameter values</h3></div></div></div><p>
We can use the TN93+Gamma[4]+INV model without specifying parameters:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test -S tn93+Rates.gamma+inv</code></strong>
</pre><p>However, we can also fix parameter values:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test -S tn93+Rates.gamma[n=4,alpha=1]+inv[p_inv=0.2]</code></strong>
</pre><p>Here we have set the shape parameter for the Gamma distribution to 1, and the
fraction of invariant sites to 20%.  Since these parameters are fixed, they will
not be estimated and their values will not be shown in the log file.
</p><p>
You can see the parameters for a model by using the <strong class="userinput"><code>help</code></strong> command, as in:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy help Rates.gamma</code></strong>
</pre><p>This will show the default value or default prior for each parameter, if there is one.
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm229"></a>6.5. Priors</h3></div></div></div><p>
By default the fraction of invariant sites follows a uniform[0,1] distribution:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy help inv</code></strong>
</pre><p>However, we can specify an alternative prior:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test -S tn93+Rates.gamma[n=4]+inv[p_inv~uniform[0,0.2]]</code></strong>
</pre><p>We can also specify parameters as positional arguments instead of using variable names:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy Globins/bglobin.fasta --test -S tn93+Rates.gamma[4]+inv[~uniform[0,0.2]]</code></strong>
</pre><p>Here "<strong class="userinput"><code>~</code></strong>" indicates a sample from the uniform distribution instead of the distribution
itself.
</p><p>
The insertion-deletion model also has parameters.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy help rs07</code></strong>
</pre><p>Here the default value for rs07:mean_length is exponential[10,1].  This indicates
a random value that is obtained by sampling an Exponential random variable with mean 10
and then adding 1 to it.
</p></div></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="idm247"></a>7. Generating an HTML Report</h2></div></div></div><p>
See <a class="link" href="http://www.bali-phy.org/README.html#output" target="_top">Section 6: Output</a> of the manual for more information about this section.
</p><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm252"></a>7.1. Inspecting output files</h3></div></div></div><p>
Look at the directories that were created to store the output files:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>cd ~/alignment_files/examples/ITS/</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>ls</code></strong>
</pre><p>Here is a shell trick with curly braces {} to avoid typing some things multiple times, illustrated with the <strong class="userinput"><code>echo</code></strong> command.  Let's see how many more iterations have been completed since we last checked:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>echo "hi!"</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>echo ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-{1,2}/C1.log</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>wc -l ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-{1,2}/C1.log</code></strong>
</pre><p>Examine the file containing the sampled trees:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-1/C1.trees</code></strong>
</pre><p>Examine the file containing the sampled alignments:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-1/C1.P1.fastas</code></strong>
</pre><p>Examine the file containing the successive best alignment/tree pairs visited:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-1/C1.MAP</code></strong>
</pre><p>The beginning of the <code class="filename">C1.out</code> file also contains a lot of information
about what command was run, when it was run, and what the process ID (PID) of the running program is.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-1/C1.out</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm282"></a>7.2. Command-line summary of output files</h3></div></div></div><p>
Try summarizing the sampled numerical parameters (e.g. not trees and alignments).
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>statreport ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-{1,2}/C1.log --mean --median &gt; Report</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less Report</code></strong>
</pre><p>
Now lets compute the consensus tree for these two runs.  When figtree asks for a name for the branch supports, type <strong class="userinput"><code>PP</code></strong> in the box.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>trees-consensus ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-{1,2}/C1.trees &gt; c50.PP.tree</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>figtree c50.PP.tree &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>
To look at the posterior probability of individual splits in the tree:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>trees-consensus ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-{1,2}/C1.trees --report=consensus &gt; c50.PP.tree</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less consensus</code></strong>
</pre><p>
Now lets see if there is evidence that the two runs have not converged yet:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>trees-bootstrap ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-{1,2}/C1.trees &gt; partitions.bs</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>grep ASDSF partitions.bs</code></strong>
</pre><p>The ASDSF (Average Standard-Deviation of Split Frequences) is a measure of how much the estimated posterior probability of splits differ between the two runs.  If it is greater than 0.01 then you should probably accumulate more iterations.  The MSDSF (Maximum SDSF) indicates the variation between runs for the worst split.
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm307"></a>7.3. Generating an HTML Report</h3></div></div></div><p>
Now lets use the analysis script to run all the summaries and make an HTML report:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bp-analyze ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-{1,2}/</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>firefox Results/index.html &amp;</code></strong>
</pre><p>This PERL script runs <span class="application">statreport</span> and <span class="application">trees-consensus</span> for you.  Take a look at what commands were run:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less Results/bp-analyze.log</code></strong>
</pre><p>The report should give us an indication of
</p><div class="orderedlist"><ol class="orderedlist" type="1"><li class="listitem">What is the majority consensus tree?</li><li class="listitem">What is consensus alignment for each partition?</li><li class="listitem">How much alignment uncertainty is there in each partition?</li><li class="listitem">How much do the split frequencies differ between runs?</li><li class="listitem">What is the effective sample size (Ne) for the Scale[1]?  For |A1|?</li></ol></div><p>
</p></div></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="idm327"></a>8. Starting and stopping the program</h2></div></div></div><p>We didn't specify the number of iterations to run in the section above, so the two analyses will run for
100,000 iterations, or until you stop them yourself.  See <a class="link" href="http://www.bali-phy.org/README.html#mixing_and_convergence" target="_top">Section
10: Convergence and Mixing: Is it done yet?</a> of the manual for
more information about when to stop an analysis.</p><p>
Let's stop the bali-phy runs now.  In order to stop a running job, you need to kill it.
We can use the PID mentioned in C1.out to kill a specific process. Let's kill the fixed-alignment
analysis first.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>less ITS-fixed-1/C1.out</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>kill <em class="replaceable"><code>PID</code></em></code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>jobs</code></strong>
</pre><p>We can also kill all running bali-phy processes:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>killall bali-phy</code></strong>
</pre><p>However, beware: if you are running multiple analyses, this will terminate all of them.
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="multigene"></a>9. Specifying the model for each partition</h2></div></div></div><p>For analyses with multiple partitions, we might want to use different models for different
partitions.  When two partitions have the same model, we might also want them to have the same
parameters.  This is described in more detail in section 4.3 of the <a class="link" href="http://www.bali-phy.org/README.html" target="_top">manual</a>.</p><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm349"></a>9.1. Using different substitution models</h3></div></div></div><p>
Now lets specify different substitution models for different partitions.

</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>cd ~/alignment_files/examples/ITS</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy {ITS1,5.8S,ITS2}.fasta -S 1:gtr -S 2:hky85 -S 3:tn93 --test</code></strong>
</pre><p>
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm359"></a>9.2. Disabling alignment estimation for some partitions</h3></div></div></div><p>
We can also disable alignment estimation for some, but not all, partitions:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy {ITS1,5.8S,ITS2}.fasta -I 1:rs07 -I 2:none -I 3:rs07 --test</code></strong>
</pre><p>Specifying <strong class="userinput"><code>-I none</code></strong> removes the insertion-deletion
model and parameters for partition 2 and also disables alignment estimation for that partition.</p><p>Note that there is no longer an I3 indel model.  Partition #3 now has the I2 indel model.
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm368"></a>9.3. Sharing model parameters between partitions</h3></div></div></div><p>We can also specify that some partitions with the same model also share the
same parameters for that model:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy {ITS1,5.8S,ITS2}.fasta -S 1,3:gtr -I 1,3:rs07 -S 2:tn93 -I 2:none --test</code></strong>
</pre><p>This means that the information is <span class="emphasis"><em>pooled</em></span> between the partitions to better estimate the shared parameters.</p><p>Take a look at the model parameters, and the parentheticals after the model descriptions.  You should see that there is no longer an S3 substitution model or an I3 indel model.  Instead, partitions #1 and #3 share the S1 substitution model and the I1 indel model.
</p></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm377"></a>9.4. Sharing substitution rates between partitions</h3></div></div></div><p>We can also specify that some partitions share the same scaling factor for branch lengths:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy {ITS1,5.8S,ITS2}.fasta -S 1,3:gtr -I 1,3:rs07 -S 2:tn93 -I 2:none --scale=1,3: --test</code></strong>
</pre><p>This means that the branch lengths for partitions 1 and 3 are the same, instead of being independently estimated.</p><p>Take a look at the model parameters.  There is no longer a Scale[3] parameter.  Instead, partitions 1 and 3 share Scale[1].</p></div></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="idm385"></a>10. Option files</h2></div></div></div>
You can collect command line options into a file for later use.  Make
a text file called <code class="filename">analysis1.script</code>:
<pre class="programlisting">align = ITS1.fasta
align = 5.8S.fasta
align = ITS2.fasta
smodel = 1,3:tn93+Rates.free[n=3]
smodel = 2:tn93
imodel = 2:none
scale = 1,3:
</pre>
You can test the analysis like this:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy -c analysis1.script --test</code></strong>
</pre>You can run it like this:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>bali-phy -c analysis1.script &amp;</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both"><a id="idm396"></a>11. Dataset preparation</h2></div></div></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm399"></a>11.1. Splitting and Merging Alignments</h3></div></div></div><p>BAli-Phy generally wants you to split concatenated gene regions in order to analyze them.
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>cd ~/alignment_files/examples/ITS-many/</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-cat -c1-223 ITS-region.fasta &gt; 1.fasta</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-cat -c224-379 ITS-region.fasta &gt; 2.fasta</code></strong>
<code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-cat -c378-551 ITS-region.fasta &gt; 3.fasta</code></strong>
</pre>
Later you might want to put them back together again:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-cat 1.fasta 2.fasta 3.fasta &gt; 123.fasta</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm415"></a>11.2. Shrinking the data set</h3></div></div></div><p>
You might want to reduce the number of taxa while attempting to preserve phylogenetic diversity:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-thin --down-to=30 ITS-region.fasta &gt; ITS-region-thinned.fasta</code></strong>
</pre><p>
You can specify that certain sequences should not be removed:
</p><pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-thin --down-to=30 --keep=Csaxicola420 ITS-region.fasta &gt; ITS-region-thinned.fasta</code></strong>
</pre></div><div class="section"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="title"><a id="idm426"></a>11.3. Cleaning the data set</h3></div></div></div>
Keep only sequences that are not too short:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-thin --longer-than=250 ITS-region.fasta &gt; ITS-region-long.fasta</code></strong>
</pre>Remove 10 sequences with the smallest number of conserved residues:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-thin --remove-crazy=10 ITS-region.fasta &gt; ITS-region-sane.fasta</code></strong>
</pre>Keep only columns with a minimum number of residues:
<pre class="screen"><code class="prompt">%</code> <strong class="userinput"><code>alignment-thin --min-letters=5 ITS-region.fasta &gt; ITS-region-censored.fasta</code></strong>
</pre></div></div></div></body></html>